CHAPTER XVIII.
A FLOOD OF SUNSHINE
Arthur Dimmesdale gazed into Hester's face with a look in which hope and joy shone out,
indeed, but with fear betwixt them, and a kind of horror at her boldness, who had spoken
what he vaguely hinted at, but dared not speak.
But Hester Prynne, with a mind of native courage and activity, and for so long a period not
merely estranged, but outlawed from society, had habituated herself to such latitude of
speculation as was altogether foreign to the clergyman.
She had wandered, without rule or guidance, in a moral wilderness, as vast, as intricate,
and shadowy as the untamed forest, amid the gloom of which they were now holding a colicky
that was to decide their fate.
Her intellect and heart had their home, as it were, in desert places, where she roamed
as freely as the wild Indian in his woods.
For years past she had looked from this estranged point of view at human institutions, and whatever
priests or legislators had established, criticizing all with hardly more reverence than the Indian
would feel for the clerical band, the judicial robe, the pillory, the gallows, the fireside,
or the church.
The tendency of her fate and fortunes had set her free.
The scarlet letter was her passport into regions where other women dared not tread.
Shame, despair, solitude, these had been her teachers, stern and wild ones, and they had
made her strong, but taught her much amiss.
The minister, on the other hand, had never gone through an experience calculated to lead
him beyond the scope of generally received laws, although, in a single instance, he had
so fearfully transgressed one of the most sacred of them.
But this had been a sin of passion, not of principle, nor even purpose.
Since that wretched epoch, he had watched with morbid zeal and minuteness, not his acts,
for those it was easy to arrange, but each breath of emotion and his every thought.
At the head of the social system, as the clergyman of that day stood, he was only the more trammeled
by its regulations, its principles, and even its prejudices.
As a priest, the framework of his order inevitably hemmed him in.
As a man who had once sinned, but who kept his conscience all alive and painfully sensitive
by the fretting of an unhealed wound, he might have been supposed safer within the line of
virtue than if he had never sinned at all.
Thus we seem to see that, as regarded Hester Prynne, the whole seven years of outlaw and
ignominy had been little other than a preparation for this very hour.
But Arthur Dimmesdale, were such a man once more to fall, what plea could be urged in
extenuation of his crime?
None, unless it avail him somewhat that he was broken down by long and exquisite suffering,
that his mind was darkened and confused by the very remorse which harrowed it, that,
between fleeing as an avowed criminal and remaining as a hypocrite, conscience might
find it hard to strike the balance, that it was human to avoid the peril of death and
infamy and the inscrutable machinations of an enemy, that, finally, to this poor pilgrim
on his dreary and desert path, faint, sick, miserable, there appeared a glimpse of human
affection and sympathy, a new life and a true one, in exchange for the heavy doom which
he was now expiating.
And be the stern and sad truth spoken, that the breach which guilt has once made into
the human soul is never, in this mortal state, repaired.
It may be watched and guarded, so that the enemy shall not force his way again into the
Citadel, and might even, in his subsequent assaults, select some other avenue in preference
to that where he had formerly succeeded.
But there is still the ruined wall, and near it the stealthy tread of the foe that would
win over again his unforgotten triumph.
The struggle, if there were one, need not be described.
Let it suffice that the clergyman resolved to flee, and not alone.
If in all these past seven years, thought he, I could recall one instant of peace or
hope, I would yet endure, for the sake of that earnest of Heaven's mercy.
But now, since I am irrevocably doomed, wherefore should I not snatch the solace allowed to
the condemned culprit before his execution?
Or, if this be the path to a better life, as Hester would persuade me, I surely give
no fairer prospect by pursuing it.
Neither can I any longer live without her companionship, so powerful is she to sustain,
so tender to soothe.
O, thou to whom I dare not lift mine eyes, wilt thou yet pardon me?
Thou wilt go, said Hester calmly, as he met her glance.
The decision once made, a glow of strange enjoyment through its flickering brightness
over the trouble of his breast.
It was the exhilarating effect, upon a prisoner just escaped from the dungeon of his own heart,
of breathing the wild, free atmosphere of an unredeemed, unchristianized, lawless religion.
His spirit rose, as it were, with a bound, and attained a nearer prospect of the sky
than throughout all the misery which had kept him groveling on the earth.
Of a deeply religious temperament, there was inevitably a tinge of the devotional in his
mood.
Do I feel joy again? cried he, wondering at himself.
Methought the germ of it was dead in me.
O, Hester, thou art my better angel.
I seem to have flung myself, sick, sin-stained, and sorrow-blackened, down upon these forest
leaves, and who have risen up all made anew, and with new powers to glorify him that hath
been merciful.
This is already the better life.
Why did we not find it sooner?
Let us not look back, answered Hester Brynne.
The past is gone.
Wherefore should we linger upon it now?
See, with this symbol I undo it all, and make it as if it had never been.
So speaking, she undid the clasp that fastened the scarlet letter, and, taking it from her
bosom, threw it to a distance among the withered leaves.
The mystic token alighted on the hither verge of the stream.
With a hand's breadth further flight it would have fallen into the water, and have given
the little brook another woe to carry onward, besides the unintelligible tale which it still
kept murmuring about.
But there lay the embroidered letter, glittering like a lost jewel, which some ill-fated wanderer
might pick up, and thenceforth be haunted by strange phantoms of guilt, sinkings of
the heart, and unaccountable misfortune.
The stigma gone, Hester heaved a long, deep sigh, in which the burden of shame and anguish
departed from her spirit.
O exquisite relief!
She had not known the weight until she felt the freedom.
By another impulse she took off the formal cap that confined her hair, and down it fell
upon her shoulders, dark and rich, with at once a shadow and a light in its abundance,
and imparting the charm of softness to her features.
There played around her mouth, and beamed out of her eyes, a radiant and tender smile,
that seemed gushing from the very heart of womanhood.
A crimson flash was glowing on her cheek that had been long so pale.
Her sex, her youth, and the whole richness of her beauty came back from what men call
the irrevocable past, and clustered themselves with her maiden hope, and a happiness before
unknown within the magic circle of this hour.
And, as if the gloom of the earth and sky had been but the effluence of these two mortal
hearts, it vanished with their sorrow.
All at once, as with a sudden smile of heaven, forth burst the sunshine, pouring a very flood
into the obscure forest, gladdening each green leaf, transmuting the yellow fallen ones to
gold, and gleaming adown the gray trunks of the solemn trees.
The objects that had made a shadow hitherto embodied the brightness now.
The course of the little brook might be traced by its merry gleam afar into the wood's heart
of mystery, which had become a mystery of joy.
Such was the sympathy of nature, that wild, heathen nature of the forest, never subjugated
by human law, nor illumined by higher truth, with the bliss of these two spirits.
Love, whether newly born or aroused from a death-like slumber, must always create a sunshine,
filling the heart so full of radiance that it overflows upon the outward world.
Had the forest still kept its gloom, it would have been bright in Hester's eyes, and bright
in Arthur Dimmesdale's.
Hester looked at him with a thrill of another joy.
"'Thou must know Pearl,' said she, "'our little Pearl.
Thou hast seen her.
Yes, I know it, but thou wilt see her now with other eyes.
She is a strange child.
I hardly comprehend her.
But thou wilt love her dearly as I do, and wilt advise me how to deal with her.'
"'Tost thou think the child will be glad to know me?' asked the minister, somewhat uneasily.
I have long shrunk from children, because they often show a distrust, a backwardness,
to be familiar with me.
I have even been afraid of little Pearl.'
"'Ah, that was sad,' answered the mother, "'but she will love thee dearly, and thou
her.
She is not far off.
I will call her Pearl, Pearl.'
"'I see the child,' observed the minister, yonder she is, standing in a streak of sunshine
a good way off, on the other side of the brook.
So thou thinkest the child will love me?'
Hester smiled, and again called to Pearl, who was visible at some distance, as the minister
had described her, like a bright appareled vision in a sunbeam which fell down upon her
through an arch of boughs.
The ray quivered to and fro, making her figure dim or distinct, now like a real child, now
like a child's spirit, as the splendour went and came again.
She heard her mother's voice, and approached slowly through the forest.
Pearl had not found the hour pass wearisomely while her mother sat talking with the clergyman.
The great black forest, stern as it showed itself to those who brought the guilt and
troubles of the world into its bosom, became the playmate of the lonely infant, as well
as it knew how.
Somber as it was, it put on the kindest of its moods to welcome her.
It offered her the partridge-berries, the growth of the preceding autumn, but ripening only
in the spring, and now red as drops of blood upon the withered leaves.
These Pearl gathered, and was pleased with their wild flavour.
The small denizens of the wilderness hardly took pains to move out of her path.
A partridge, indeed, with a brood of tin behind her, ran forward threateningly, but soon repented
of her fierceness, and clucked to her young ones not to be afraid.
A pigeon, alone on a low branch, allowed Pearl to come beneath, and uttered a sound as much
of greeting as alarm.
A squirrel, from the lofty depths of his domestic tree, chattered either in anger or merriment,
for the squirrel is such a choleric and humorous little personage that it is hard to distinguish
between his moods.
So he chattered at the child, and flung down a nut upon her head.
It was a last year's nut, and already gnawed by his sharp tooth.
A fox, startled from his sleep by her light footstep on the leaves, looked inquisitively
at Pearl, as doubting whether it were better to steal off, or renew his nap on the same
spot.
A wolf, it is said, but here the tale has surely lapsed into the improbable, came up
and smelt of Pearl's robe, and offered his savage head to be patted by her hand.
The truth seems to be, however, that the mother forest, and these wild things which it nourished,
all recognized a kindred wilderness in the human child.
And she was gentler here than in the grassy margined streets of the settlement, or in
her mother's cottage.
The bowers appeared to know it, and one and another whispered as she passed,
Adorn thyself with me, thou beautiful child, adorn thyself with me.
And to please them, Pearl gathered the violets, and anemones, and columbines, and some twigs
of the freshest green which the old trees held down before her eyes.
With these she decorated her hair and her young waist, and became a nymph-child, or
an infant-dryad, or whatever else was in closest sympathy with the antique wood.
In such guise had Pearl adorned herself when she heard her mother's voice, and came slowly
back.
Slowly, for she saw the clergyman.
March 19th, 2007.